Add explainer for `popover=hint` and hover triggering of popovers (#766)
openui/open-ui: site/src/pages/components/popover-hint.research.explainer.mdx

# Background

The [Popover API](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/C#the-popover-attribute) ([MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API), [OpenUI Explainer](https://open-ui.org/components/popover.research.explainer/)) is now part of the HTML standard. It allows developers to create popovers of varying types and also easily trigger them from buttons, without using Javascript.

This explainer discusses two important extensions of the Popover API:

1. The ability to trigger popovers via a "hover" type interaction.
2. The ability to show a new type of popover for "hints".

These two capabilities are orthogonal but closely related, and this explainer therefore discusses them both.

The motivating use case, but certainly not the only use case, for these two capabilities is in the construction of "tooltips". Typically, tooltips are transient bits of additional information related to a bit of content. This additional information is *not required* and is supplementary in nature. Usually the user accesses this tooltip by hovering, keyboard-focusing, or long-pressing a control.

> # "Hover" triggering

Reviewer: I agree - `hover` is misleading in that it applies only pointer compatibility. Another alternative might be `active`?

> # "Hover" triggering

Reviewer 2: I agree with @keithamus and @iansan5653 for keyboard users the popup should still appear upon traversal to the element that has the associated popup. That said, I'm curious of @scottaohara thoughts as that may produce numerous popups while tabbing through a site.

> # "Hover" triggering

Reviewer 3: it is still a sort of open question about this that I think may need to be brain stormed a bit.

For instance, in the scope of tooltips it may be better to think about introducing a user setting or alternate key to show/hide a tooltip at will.  Esc is often used to dismiss, but the only way to get a tooltip back is to navigate away and then back to the element.  That's silly and we could do better with this.  

But there are other types of UI - e.g., text/search input fields with autocomplete popups that one might want to show up immediately on focus, and it'd be good if we could support both.

> # "Hover" triggering

Author: Let's move at least the bikeshedding part of this discussion (which is great, thanks all!) over to this issue: https://github.com/openui/open-ui/issues/767

Scott, we can open another issue to discuss your comments about a user setting or alternate key - does that make sense?

The majority of hover-triggered UI has a set of delays associated with it. It tends to be jarring to the user if UI elements show up *immediately* upon hovering an element. For example, that causes elements to show and hide rapidly as the user moves their mouse across the screen. To allow the user to be more intentional, there is an expectation that the element of interest must be hovered for a short period of time before any popovers are triggered. Additionally, it is common for such hover-triggered popovers to also be hidden automatically when they are no longer hovered, again after a sufficient delay. This "hide delay" is particularly important in the case that there is a physical gap between the invoking element and the hint popover: the user must move the mouse from the invoker to the popover and cross that gap, and it is frustrating if the popover closes while that traversal is taking place.

To facilitate these delays, two new CSS properties are added:

- `popover-show-delay` - applied to the invoking element. The invoking element must be hovered, focused, or long-pressed for this long before the popover is shown. The default value for this property is `0.5s`.

> - `popover-hide-delay` - applied to the popover. The invoking element *or* the popover must be **not** hovered, focused, or long-pressed for this long before the popover is hidden. The default value for this property is `infinity`.

Reviewer: Does a default value of `infinity` mean the popover does not automatically hide itself by default? To me this feels unexpected considering it automatically shows itself. I'd expect something like `0.5s` to be the default here as well.

Author: Right - `infinity` means no auto-hide behavior. I had to do that because the property must have a value for all elements, and any popover therefore is subject to this behavior. Note that as-described, `popover-hide-delay` works on any popover, regardless of whether it was hover-triggered.

> - `popover-hide-delay` - applied to the popover. The invoking element *or* the popover must be **not** hovered, focused, or long-pressed for this long before the popover is hidden. The default value for this property is `infinity`.

Author: Interesting feedback! I had envisioned these to work with popovers (and maybe dialogs?) only. How do you envision making them more general?

As to `popover-show-delay` I'm not sure this can be done with `animation-delay` - can you prove me wrong? My concern is that the behavior wouldn't be de-bounced in that case. I.e. set `popover-show-delay` to 0.5 seconds, and have the user hover and then de-hover the element only for 0.2 seconds. Nothing should happen, but I think `animation-delay` would cause the popover to just be shown after 0.5 seconds, right?

> - `popover-hide-delay` - applied to the popover. The invoking element *or* the popover must be **not** hovered, focused, or long-pressed for this long before the popover is hidden. The default value for this property is `infinity`.

Reviewer 4: https://codepen.io/keithamus/pen/yLQabJK this uses `animation-delay` to ensure that as you hover and de-hover (or focus/defocus) the `button` for less than `0.5s`, the `div` will not be shown. I believe this is properly debounced as you describe. I don't know how to get the same effect upon exit of that state; transitions don't work quite the same, I believe.

> - `popover-hide-delay` - applied to the popover. The invoking element *or* the popover must be **not** hovered, focused, or long-pressed for this long before the popover is hidden. The default value for this property is `infinity`.

Author: Ahh nice - I see that you get that by adding `:focus` to clear the animation if you de-hover. But you're right - not possible on the de-hover side of things.

Do you think this is worth opening a CSSWG issue to discuss? I mean about the "more general problem" question?

It is important to "debounce" these delays. Said another way, the delays are interpreted as *the time an element must be continuously hovered or de-hovered*. The naive Javascript implementation of this behavior is to just call `setTimeout(() => show/hidePopover(), delayValue)`. I.e. after the invoking element is hovered, wait `delayValue`, and then show the popover. But that does not properly handle the situation where the user hovers the element, and then de-hovers it, all within the delay time. In that case, no popover should be shown. Similarly, once the popover is shown and the user de-hovers the popover briefly but re-hoveres it again quickly, the popover should not close.

## Popover types

> The new hover-triggering functionality should work for all `popover` types. There are use cases, e.g. for `popover=auto`; for example, a nested menu structure where sub-menus are shown when items in the primary menu are hovered or focused.

Author: But there are very common menu patterns that do exactly this. Google docs is one of them: the menu bar menus all have hover triggered sub-menus. Perhaps your point is that this is a bad pattern, but if people are going to do it, I'd love to provide them the "correct/best" way via a supported API, rather than having them all roll their own.

Is your concern shifting focus (presumably via the `autofocus` attribute) only? If so, maybe we could think about modifying the behavior of `autofocus` in the hover-triggered case?

## Example

```html
<button popovertarget=menu1>Menu</button>

> <menu popover id=menu1>

Reviewer 3: but none of the list items or buttons have role=menuitem either, so it matches the HTML example of how to create a "menu" list of actions (buttons).

but to your point, yes, people aren't super familiar with the menu element and often misunderstand that menu !== menu.  :(

> <menu popover id=menu1>

Author: I'm one of those people. Even though I've been told this, I consistently forget it.

Is the "correct" thing to use `<div role=menu>` then? For now, I've updated the explainer to do that, but let me know if there's something better.

  <li>
    <button popovertarget=submenu1 popovertargetaction=hover>
      Sub menu 1
    </button>
  </li>
  <li>
    <button popovertarget=submenu2 popovertargetaction=hover>
      Sub menu 2
    </button>
  </li>
</menu>

> <menu class=submenu popover id=submenu1>

Reviewer 3: probably should just move away from menu elements all together, as the example doesn't demonstrate role=menu, but people may assume it is one

> <menu class=submenu popover id=submenu1>

Author: I've moved to `<div role=menu>`, but yeah I'd be concerned that adding all of the details would muddy the waters. I **do** however think that the hover-triggered menu is a pretty common use case, so it's good to include. I can perhaps include some text alluding to this not being a "complete" solution?

  Sub-menu #1
</menu>
<menu class=submenu popover id=submenu2>
  Sub-menu #2
</menu>
<style>
  button { popover-show-delay: 0.5s; }
  [popover].submenu { popover-hide-delay: 0.5s; }
  menu { list-style-type: none; }
  menu button { border: none; }
</style>
```

This example implements a popover menu (`id=menu1`) which has sub-menus (`id=submenu1` and `id=submenu2`) which can be triggered simply by hovering or focusing the main menu's buttons.

# `popover=hint` Behavior

When a hint is shown, it behaves differently from other popover types such as `popover=auto` and `popover=manual` in a few ways:

|               | `popover=auto`            | `popover=hint` | `popover=manual` |
| ------------- | ------------------------- | -------------- | --------------   |
| Light dismiss |      Yes                  |     Yes        |      No          |
| Force-hides:  | Other `auto`s and `hint`s | Other `hint`s  | Nothing          |

> | Nesting:      |     Yes                   | No             | No               |

Reviewer 4: Would it be right here to say there can only be 1 open `hint` on the page, many nested (but only 1 "root") `auto` and many `manual`?

Author: Yes, that's a great summary. I think I'll add that text to the explainer, thanks!

> First, hints should always be light dismissable. They are transient, supplementary information, so they should not require affirmative action to close them. Clicking outside or hitting ESC will close a hint.

Reviewer 3: moving to button 2 should close the hint from button 1.

> First, hints should always be light dismissable. They are transient, supplementary information, so they should not require affirmative action to close them. Clicking outside or hitting ESC will close a hint.

Reviewer 4: I agree. Perhaps I’m misreading but the explainer doesn’t feel clear that this is the case.

> First, hints should always be light dismissable. They are transient, supplementary information, so they should not require affirmative action to close them. Clicking outside or hitting ESC will close a hint.

Reviewer 3: @keithamus this help?

```suggestion
First, hints should always be light dismissable. They are transient, supplementary information, so they should not require affirmative action to close them. Clicking or tapping outside, hitting the <kbd>ESC</kbd> key, or moving focus away from the invoking element will close a hint.
```

Author: My only concern is the last thing about moving focus away. We explicitly didn't do that for `popover=auto` because it was jarring and hard to get right. I'd say we definitely shouldn't do that for "rich hints" for all of the same reasons.

My intention was to make the "move focus away to dismiss" is handled entirely by `popover-hide-delay`. See the new text I've added, and LMK if this allays any of your concerns here.

> First, hints should always be light dismissable. They are transient, supplementary information, so they should not require affirmative action to close them. Clicking outside or hitting ESC will close a hint.

Author: So I think this behavior (**bluring** button 1) is handled by the `popover-hide-delay` CSS property. If hint 1 was shown because button 1 was focused (for `popover-show-delay` seconds), then it will be hidden once button 1 is blurred for `popover-hide-delay` seconds.

I've added an explicit example and a lot more text around this. LMK if that helps clarify.

Second, when a hint is opened, it should not immediately close other `popover=auto` popovers that are open. For example, if a select picker UI is opened as a `popover=auto`, and the user hovers or focuses a unrelated element to see its hint, that action should not close the select picker. In essence, the hint is *even more transient* than the picker, so it shouldn't take precedence. However, if the user subsequently hovers/focuses a *second* unrelated element and another hint is shown, the first hint should be closed. It would be confusing to have two hints open at a time. So hints should close other hints.

Finally, `popover=auto` popovers support "nesting": the idea that one popover is a descendant of another popover, for example in the case of nested menus. It makes sense in that example for the parent menu to stay open while the child menu opens. The same is not true for hints - it would be confusing for one hint to be nested inside another, and wouldn't make sense. Therefore, hints do not support nesting.

# Accessibility

> A key distinction between types of hints is whether it may be important for a user to explore or interact with the hint. Consensus on these types of hints/tooltips can help with the resolution of [ARIA#979: Clarify the use of role=tooltip](https://github.com/w3c/aria/issues/979).

Author: @scottaohara I'll leave this comment to you, as I don't have enough context.

> - A plain hint contains only elements with a computed role of generic, text and images.

Reviewer 5: Given that `aria-describedby` will not properly convey semantics, I don't think that anything other than a text string should be allowed as a "plain hint".

Author: Interesting comment! @scottaohara would you agree? I think it sounds pretty limiting to only allow pure text, and not even images.

Reviewer 3: no i don't agree.  that's why there would be the two concepts of a rich hint vs a standard hint.  

per the hello world example above, or even something like the following:

```
<input aria-describedby=foo>
<p id=foo><img src=... alt=warning:> this field cannot be empty</p>
```

the above is perfectly fine to convey as "warning: this field cannot be empty"

as opposed to "warning, image, this field cannot be empty"

> - A plain hint contains only elements with a computed role of generic, text and images.

Reviewer 3: that should be exactly how this would be conveyed, and that's why these 3 types of content would be expected/allowed, since all structural semantics would be dropped in the description computation, so the flattened text string of the elements and the alternative text of the image would be used to create the description.

> - A plain hint contains only elements with a computed role of generic, text and images.

Author: I was going to say the same thing - "Hello world" does seem like the best thing to read in this case. Maybe I'm wrong.

- A rich hint contains other elements, such as links, form controls, lists or tables. These are hints that a screen reader user may need to interact with or explore.

## Why differentiate between rich and plain hints?

For a screen reader user, there already exists simple settings and commands to read accessible descriptions, which are just an additional piece of text associated with an object, such as used by a `title` or `aria-description` attribute.  When a hint is just used for a prettier tooltip, a screen reader can reuse this simple mechanism and act like a title was present. There is no need for the user to navigate to it.

However, when a hint is used for something more complex, such as a dialog that appears on hover, or a data table, then the user needs to be able to learn it’s there and navigate to it, so that they can use additional screen reader commands to interact with it.

## A11y API support

For the best screen reading experience, the implementation will need to expose different properties for a plain hint vs a rich hint (classification described above).

> - Plain hints: the browser will simply expose the text on the triggering element. The actual popover target element and its descendants can be invisible/ignored in the AX tree.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Plain hints: the browser will expose the flattened text string comprised of the hint's text and text alternative content via the invoking element. The actual popover target element and its descendants can be invisible/ignored in the AX tree. Note: this would be similar to how `title` attribute tooltips are treated today.
```

Author: Thanks, I incorporated this.

>     1. If no other accessible name is available, use hint’s inner text for the accessible name

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    1. If the invoking element lacks an accessible name, use computed text of the hint as the element's accessible name
```

>     2. If it's used as the name, then use it to compute the description, setting the described by relation to point from the trigger to the hint element

Reviewer 5: > If it's used as the name

I am confused by this bit. Do we mean, if the triggering element already has an accessible name?

Reviewer 3: this should probably be something like "if the triggering element already has an accessible name, then the hint becomes the accessible description..."

this is essentially supposed to mimic the current behavior of the title attribute.

Author: Thanks - I've updated the text with your suggestion.

>     2. If it's used as the name, then use it to compute the description, setting the described by relation to point from the trigger to the hint element

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    2. If the hint is not used as the accessible name, then the hint would be treated as the accessible description of the invoking element. A described by relation would point from the trigger to the hint element.
```

- Rich hints:
    1. Add `aria-expanded` on the triggering element: the same treatment as for `popover=auto`.
    2. Minimum role of `tooltip` on the target — see [spec PR describing minimum role](https://github.com/w3c/html-aam/pull/454).

>     3. Add `aria-details` pointing from the trigger to the popover. This allows screen readers to announce the presence of the popover and a command for navigating to it.

Reviewer 3: we may want to overtly call out that a rich hint would not contribute to the description calculation, and i'm almost certain we should not include it in the naming calculation either.

Author: If you suggest some good wording for this, I'm happy to include it!

Reviewer 3: per your mention of doing addon work in another issue/PR

Author: Great - thanks!

---
menu: Proposals

> name: Popover=hint and Hover Triggering (Explainer)

Author: Ok. I went with `Popover Hint and Hover` for now. Not awesome, but at least it's short enough. Likely we should try to remove "(Explainer)" from all of them anyway, since it's quite repetitive and not informative.

@andrico1234 for further comments. But I think ok for this PR.

path: /components/popover-hint.research.explainer
pathToResearch: /components/popup.research
layout: ../../layouts/ComponentLayout.astro
---

> # Popover Hover Triggering and `popover=hint`

Author: Oh, yeah. Plus the `popover=hint` part looks really funny.

Ok, removed. And I added a quick summary. I'm happy to add/modify in a subsequent PR.

- [@mfreed7](https://github.com/mfreed7), [@scottaohara](https://github.com/scottaohara), [@aleventhal](https://github.com/aleventhal)

> - June 8, 2023

Author: Done. As I'm not sure what will happen to my review approval if I add files, I'll refrain from fixing the original popover explainer for right now.

Because of the `popover-hide-delay: 0.6s`, the hint will be automatically hidden after 0.6 seconds, once "interest has left" the popover. That depends on how the popover was triggered:

- If the invoker was **hovered** to trigger "Hint 1", then it will stay open as long as the invoker or the hint are still hovered. If the mouse if moved off of *both* the invoker and the hint for 0.6 seconds, the hint will be closed.
- If the invoker was **keyboard focused** to trigger "Hint 1", then it will stay open as long as focus is contained within either the invoker or the hint. If keyboard focus leaves both invoker and hint for 0.6 seconds, the hint will be closed.

## Popover types

The new hover-triggering functionality should work for all `popover` types. There are use cases, e.g. for `popover=auto`; for example, a nested menu structure where sub-menus are shown when items in the primary menu are hovered or focused.

## Example menu

```html
<button popovertarget=menu1>Menu</button>

> <div role=menu popover id=menu1>

Reviewer 3: if this changes to role=menu, then there's a lot of extra updates that need to happen to make the markup pattern correct (role=none on all the li elements, role=menuitem on all the buttons, maybe even use tabindex=-1 to allude to the arrow key navigation)

but if we change this to a `ul`, then it's just a list like it was with the `menu` element, which means this would all just be tab key navigation and we don't need to distract with all the extra ARIA/implied keyboard functionality.  

we can go either way, it's fine.  we just need to add in all the other attributes if we go this route.

Author: Ok, thanks for the suggestion. I've changed this to `<ul>`s, and removed the `role`.

- A plain hint contains only elements with a computed role of generic, text and images.
- A rich hint contains other elements, such as links, form controls, lists or tables. These are hints that a screen reader user may need to interact with or explore.

## Why differentiate between rich and plain hints?

For a screen reader user, there already exists simple settings and commands to read accessible descriptions, which are just an additional piece of text associated with an object, such as used by a `title` or `aria-description` attribute.  When a hint is just used for a prettier tooltip, a screen reader can reuse this simple mechanism and act like a title was present. There is no need for the user to navigate to it.

However, when a hint is used for something more complex, such as a dialog that appears on hover, or a data table, then the user needs to be able to learn it’s there and navigate to it, so that they can use additional screen reader commands to interact with it.

## A11y API support

For the best screen reading experience, the implementation will need to expose different properties for a plain hint vs a rich hint (classification described above).

> - Plain hints: the browser will expose the flattened text string comprised of the hint's text and text alternative content via the invoking element. The actual popover target element and its descendants can be invisible/ignored in the AX tree. Note: this would be similar to how `title` attribute tooltips are treated today.

Author: Markdown is cool, until it's not. I'll try. I think you're right about lining things up with the "Plain"/"Rich".

# `::tooltip` pseudo element

[CSSWG Issue 8930](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/8930) discusses the addition of a `::tooltip` (or similarly named) pseudo element that could be used to generate tooltips via CSS, and style them. These are intended (though see the discussion) to be Plain Hints (as described above). This proposal may be complimentary to this explainer's feature proposals, or it might replace some of them.

# Monkeypatch spec

> {To-do: document the changes necessary to the [WHATWG/html spec](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/C#the-popover-attribute) for this proposal.}

Reviewer 6: I think the use of `{}` here may be what's causing the deploy failure, see https://mdxjs.com/docs/troubleshooting-mdx/#could-not-parse-expression-with-acorn-error .  Maybe you want `\{` and `\}` ?

Author: Thanks!
